docs/03-networking.md, before:

# Networking

This document covers network topology, DNS architecture, load balancing, ingress routing, TLS, and authentication for the homelab. For the hardware overview, see [Getting Started](00-getting-started.md). For k3s server flags that disable built-in networking components, see [RPis and k3s](01-rpis-and-k3s.md#why-k3s).

## Network Topology

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph WAN
        User([User])
        CF{Cloudflare<br/>DNS + Proxy}
    end
    subgraph LAN [LAN - 192.168.1.0/24]
        Modem[Modem - BGW210<br/>IP Passthrough]
        Router{Router - FreshTomato<br/>192.168.1.1}
        Switch{PoE Switch - GS305EP<br/>192.168.1.2}
        Synology[Synology NAS<br/>192.168.1.200 / .201]
        subgraph Cluster [k3s Cluster]
            M1[k3-m1 control-plane<br/>192.168.1.210]
            N1[k3-n1 worker<br/>192.168.1.211]
            MetalLB{MetalLB<br/>192.168.1.220-239}
        end
    end
    User --> CF
    CF -->|HTTPS 443| Modem
    Modem -->|IP Passthrough| Router
    Router -->|Firewall: only<br/>Cloudflare IPs| MetalLB
    Router --> Switch
    Switch -->|PoE| M1
    Switch -->|PoE| N1
    Router --> Synology
```

All devices have static IPs assigned on the router. The Pis are powered via PoE through the managed switch. MetalLB advertises service IPs on the LAN via ARP (L2 mode), making Kubernetes services reachable as first-class LAN devices.

## Traffic Flow

### External Request (Internet -> Service)

```
User -> Cloudflare DNS (resolves to WAN IP)
     -> Cloudflare Proxy (HTTPS termination + re-encryption)
     -> Router (firewall allows Cloudflare IPs only)
     -> DNAT to 192.168.1.220:443 (nginx-external LB)
     -> ingress-nginx matches Host header -> routes to Service -> Pod
```

### Internal Request (LAN -> Service)

```
LAN client -> CoreDNS (resolves *.matthew-stratton.me to MetalLB IP)
           -> 192.168.1.221 (nginx-internal LB)
           -> ingress-nginx matches Host header -> routes to Service -> Pod
```

CoreDNS static hosts resolve `*.matthew-stratton.me` domains to the appropriate MetalLB IPs, so LAN clients reach internal services directly without going through Cloudflare or requiring hairpin NAT.

## DNS

DNS resolution flows through a chain: clients query CoreDNS, which forwards unknown queries to AdGuard Home for ad-blocking, which falls back to Cloudflare (`1.1.1.1`) for upstream resolution. Public DNS is managed on Cloudflare.

### Cloudflare (Public DNS)

Cloudflare manages the `matthew-stratton.me` zone. Public A records point to the router's WAN IP. The router runs a dynamic DNS client that updates Cloudflare when the WAN IP changes, keeping records in sync with the ISP-assigned address.

Cloudflare also acts as a reverse proxy for internet-facing services -- external HTTPS traffic passes through Cloudflare before reaching the cluster. The router firewall only accepts traffic from Cloudflare's IP ranges (see [Router Firewall](#router-firewall)).

### CoreDNS (Cluster + LAN DNS)

k3s's built-in CoreDNS is disabled. A custom CoreDNS deployment provides both in-cluster DNS (`cluster.local`) and LAN-wide DNS resolution.

CoreDNS is exposed to the LAN at `192.168.1.223` via two LoadBalancer services (one UDP, one TCP, sharing the same IP via MetalLB's `allow-shared-ip` annotation). LAN clients (or the router's DHCP settings) can point to this IP for DNS.

The Corefile forwards unknown queries to AdGuard Home (`192.168.1.222`) first, then Cloudflare (`1.1.1.1`) as a fallback. A static hosts file maps infrastructure hostnames and `*.matthew-stratton.me` domains to their MetalLB IPs, so LAN clients resolve internal services without hairpin NAT.

Configuration lives in `kube/sys/coredns/coredns.yml`.

### AdGuard Home (Ad-blocking DNS)

AdGuard Home runs at `192.168.1.222` and sits between CoreDNS and the upstream resolver. It filters ads and trackers for all DNS queries originating from the LAN. Configuration is managed via the AdGuard web UI at `adguard.matthew-stratton.me`.

### Local Client DNS (Split DNS)

Internal services have no public DNS records -- they only exist in CoreDNS's static hosts file. LAN clients using an external resolver (Cloudflare, VPN-pushed DNS, etc.) won't be able to resolve them.

A NetworkManager dispatcher script ([`scripts/homelab-split-dns.sh`](../scripts/homelab-split-dns.sh)) handles this for Linux workstations with `systemd-resolved`. On every connection event, it probes CoreDNS to detect the home network, then configures a `~matthew-stratton.me` routing domain via `resolvectl` to direct matching queries to CoreDNS. It works across connection types (wifi, ethernet, thunderbolt dock), is inert off the home network, and survives VPN reconnects. Install to `/etc/NetworkManager/dispatcher.d/` and `chmod 755`.

## Router Configuration (FreshTomato)

The Nighthawk R7000 runs [FreshTomato](https://www.freshtomato.org/) firmware (AIO build -- the VPN build is missing kernel modules like NFS).

### Setup Checklist

1. Move the web admin UI to port 8080 (HTTP) or 8443 (HTTPS) -- ports 80/443 must be free for forwarding to the cluster
2. Enable SSH with public key auth, disable password login
3. Change the default admin credentials
4. Assign static IPs for all infrastructure devices (Synology, switch, Pis)
5. Configure dynamic DNS to update Cloudflare when the WAN IP changes
6. Install the firewall script (see below)

### Router Firewall

The firewall script ([`scripts/router-firewall.sh`](../scripts/router-firewall.sh)) restricts inbound internet traffic to Cloudflare's proxy IP ranges and forwards it to the external ingress controller (`192.168.1.220`). Direct-to-IP access from the internet is blocked. Internal LAN traffic (`192.168.1.0/24`) is unrestricted.

The script is saved to the router's persistent storage and executed via Administration > Scripts > Firewall:

```bash
sh /mnt/1.44.1-42218/firewall_rules.sh
```

Node-level firewalls are disabled -- `firewalld` is masked on all nodes via Ansible. k3s manages its own iptables rules.

## MetalLB

[MetalLB](https://metallb.universe.tf/) provides load balancer IPs for Kubernetes services on bare-metal. It runs in L2 (ARP) mode, announcing service IPs on the LAN so the router and other devices can reach them.

Configuration:
- **IP pool**: `192.168.1.220-239` (defined in `kube/sys/metallb/addresspool.yml`)
- **Mode**: L2Advertisement
- **Chart**: Bitnami MetalLB via Helmfile (`kube/sys/metallb/helmfile.yaml`)

Services request a specific IP from the pool using `spec.loadBalancerIP` in their Service definition. The pool must not overlap with the router's DHCP range.

## Ingress Controllers

The cluster runs two separate ingress-nginx controllers to separate internet-facing and LAN-only traffic. Both deploy to the `ingress-nginx` namespace as independent Helm releases.

### External (`nginx-external`)

Handles internet-facing traffic arriving via Cloudflare.

| Setting | Value |
| ------- | ----- |
| IngressClass | `nginx-external` |
| LoadBalancer IP | `192.168.1.220` |
| Proxy protocol | Enabled (required for Cloudflare) |
| ModSecurity + OWASP CRS | Enabled |
| SSL passthrough | Enabled |

Proxy protocol is needed because traffic arrives through Cloudflare's reverse proxy -- without it, all source IPs would appear as Cloudflare's.

### Internal (`nginx-internal`)

Handles LAN-only traffic. Restricted by source IP ranges.

| Setting | Value |
| ------- | ----- |
| IngressClass | `nginx-internal` |
| LoadBalancer IP | `192.168.1.221` |
| Source IP allowlist | `192.168.1.0/24`, `10.42.0.0/24`, `10.43.0.0/16` |
| External traffic policy | `Local` (preserves client IP) |
| SSL passthrough | Enabled |

No ModSecurity or WAF rules -- internal traffic is trusted.

Each app's `network.yml` specifies which ingress class it uses. To see current assignments: `kubectl get ingress -A`.

## TLS

### Kubernetes TLS (cert-manager)

[cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/) automates TLS certificate issuance for Kubernetes ingresses. It uses LetsEncrypt with Cloudflare DNS-01 challenges -- no HTTP-01 challenge is needed since DNS validation works regardless of whether the service is internet-accessible.

Two ClusterIssuers are configured:
- **`letsencrypt`** -- Production issuer, used by default
- **`letsencrypt-staging`** -- For testing (avoids rate limits)

The default issuer is set in cert-manager's Helm values (`defaultIssuerName: letsencrypt`), so ingresses get TLS certificates automatically without explicit annotations. Ingresses that need staging certs override with `cert-manager.io/cluster-issuer: "letsencrypt-staging"`.

Cloudflare API credentials (`CF_EMAIL`, `CF_API_KEY`) are injected via `envsubst` from `.envrc` into the ClusterIssuer manifests during deployment.

Configuration lives in `kube/sys/cert-manager/`.

### Synology DSM TLS (acme.sh)

The Synology NAS has its own LetsEncrypt certificate for the DSM web UI, managed separately from cert-manager using [acme.sh](https://github.com/acmesh-official/acme.sh) with Cloudflare DNS validation.

A scheduled task in DSM Control Panel periodically runs a renewal script:

- **Script**: `/var/services/homes/certadmin/cert-renew.sh` (contains Cloudflare API tokens)
- **Synology user**: `certadmin` -- a dedicated DSM user the script uses to update the certificate in DSM
- **Scheduled task**: Runs as the `root` system user
- **Cloudflare auth**: The script needs a [Cloudflare API token](https://github.com/acmesh-official/acme.sh/wiki/dnsapi#dns_cf) -- if renewal breaks, this is the most likely cause

Troubleshooting:
- Add `--debug 2` to the acme.sh commands in the renewal script for verbose output
- SSH access requires `sudo su` to interact with the scheduled task or script
- Upgrade acme.sh (as root): `/usr/local/share/acme.sh/acme.sh --force --upgrade --nocron --home /usr/local/share/acme.sh`

Reference: [Synology DSM 7 with LetsEncrypt and DNS Challenge](https://dr-b.io/post/Synology-DSM-7-with-Lets-Encrypt-and-DNS-Challenge)

## References

- [ingress-nginx bare-metal considerations](https://kubernetes.github.io/ingress-nginx/deploy/baremetal/)
- [MetalLB L2 mode](https://metallb.universe.tf/concepts/layer2/)
- [cert-manager ACME ingress tutorial](https://cert-manager.io/docs/tutorials/acme/ingress/)
- [acme.sh Cloudflare DNS API](https://github.com/acmesh-official/acme.sh/wiki/dnsapi#dns_cf)

## Related Documentation

- [Getting Started](00-getting-started.md) -- Hardware details, software stack overview
- [RPis and k3s](01-rpis-and-k3s.md) -- k3s configuration, disabled components (Traefik, ServiceLB, CoreDNS)
- [Persistence](02-persistence.md) -- Synology NAS storage configuration
- [Security](04-security.md) -- Authentication with oauth2-proxy
- [Observability](05-observability.md) -- Logging and monitoring

Commit message:

Update documentation for MikroTik migration completion
- Replace old hardware (NETGEAR Nighthawk, GS305EP) with MikroTik RB5009UPr+S+IN and TP-Link EAP723 in hardware table
- Remove price column (outdated information)
- Fix 4GB/1GB typo in Compute section
- Rewrite Network section to describe MikroTik router/switch + TP-Link AP
- Update Software Stack to mention MikroTik provisioning
- Update Repository Layout to include router provisioning in ansible/ description
- Update Prerequisites to reference Ansible-managed DHCP reservations and RouterOS dependencies
- Add MikroTik bootstrap/configure playbooks to provisioning overview
- Update Networking diagram to show MikroTik (router/switch/PoE) and TP-Link AP as separate nodes
- Rename CoreDNS hostname from 'switch' to 'wifi-ap' (reflects actual hardware)
- Rewrite Router Configuration section for MikroTik/Ansible approach
- Add disclaimer that external access config (DDNS, port forwarding) is in progress
- Remove references to FreshTomato, router-firewall.sh, and manual router setup checklist

docs/03-networking.md, after:

# Networking

This document covers network topology, DNS architecture, load balancing, ingress routing, TLS, and authentication for the homelab. For the hardware overview, see [Getting Started](00-getting-started.md). For k3s server flags that disable built-in networking components, see [RPis and k3s](01-rpis-and-k3s.md#why-k3s).

**Note:** External access (Cloudflare proxy configuration, firewall port forwarding, DDNS) is currently in progress. Core LAN networking (MetalLB, ingress controllers, DNS, TLS within the cluster) is stable.

## Network Topology

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph WAN
        User([User])
        CF{Cloudflare<br/>DNS + Proxy}
    end
    subgraph LAN [LAN - 192.168.1.0/24]
        Modem[Modem - BGW210<br/>IP Passthrough]
        Router{MikroTik RB5009UPr+S+IN<br/>Router/Switch/PoE<br/>192.168.1.1}
        AP[TP-Link EAP723<br/>WiFi AP<br/>192.168.1.2]
        Synology[Synology NAS<br/>192.168.1.200 / .201]
        subgraph Cluster [k3s Cluster]
            M1[k3-m1 control-plane<br/>192.168.1.210]
            N1[k3-n1 worker<br/>192.168.1.211]
            MetalLB{MetalLB<br/>192.168.1.220-239}
        end
    end
    User --> CF
    CF -->|HTTPS 443| Modem
    Modem -->|IP Passthrough| Router
    Router -->|Firewall: only<br/>Cloudflare IPs| MetalLB
    Router -->|PoE| AP
    Router -->|PoE| M1
    Router -->|PoE| N1
    Router --> Synology
```

All devices have static IPs: infrastructure devices (Pis, Synology, AP) via DHCP reservations on the router; Kubernetes services via MetalLB. The Pis and AP are powered via PoE directly from the router. MetalLB advertises service IPs on the LAN via ARP (L2 mode), making Kubernetes services reachable as first-class LAN devices.

## Traffic Flow

### External Request (Internet -> Service)

```
User -> Cloudflare DNS (resolves to WAN IP)
     -> Cloudflare Proxy (HTTPS termination + re-encryption)
     -> Router (firewall allows Cloudflare IPs only)
     -> DNAT to 192.168.1.220:443 (nginx-external LB)
     -> ingress-nginx matches Host header -> routes to Service -> Pod
```

### Internal Request (LAN -> Service)

```
LAN client -> CoreDNS (resolves *.matthew-stratton.me to MetalLB IP)
           -> 192.168.1.221 (nginx-internal LB)
           -> ingress-nginx matches Host header -> routes to Service -> Pod
```

CoreDNS static hosts resolve `*.matthew-stratton.me` domains to the appropriate MetalLB IPs, so LAN clients reach internal services directly without going through Cloudflare or requiring hairpin NAT.

## DNS

DNS resolution flows through a chain: clients query CoreDNS, which forwards unknown queries to AdGuard Home for ad-blocking, which falls back to Cloudflare (`1.1.1.1`) for upstream resolution. Public DNS is managed on Cloudflare.

### Cloudflare (Public DNS)

Cloudflare manages the `matthew-stratton.me` zone. Public A records point to the router's WAN IP. Dynamic DNS is configured to update Cloudflare when the WAN IP changes (see MikroTik configuration for DDNS setup).

Cloudflare also acts as a reverse proxy for internet-facing services -- external HTTPS traffic passes through Cloudflare before reaching the cluster. The router firewall only accepts traffic from Cloudflare's IP ranges.

### CoreDNS (Cluster + LAN DNS)

k3s's built-in CoreDNS is disabled. A custom CoreDNS deployment provides both in-cluster DNS (`cluster.local`) and LAN-wide DNS resolution.

CoreDNS is exposed to the LAN at `192.168.1.223` via two LoadBalancer services (one UDP, one TCP, sharing the same IP via MetalLB's `allow-shared-ip` annotation). LAN clients (or the router's DHCP settings) can point to this IP for DNS.

The Corefile forwards unknown queries to AdGuard Home (`192.168.1.222`) first, then Cloudflare (`1.1.1.1`) as a fallback. A static hosts file maps infrastructure hostnames and `*.matthew-stratton.me` domains to their MetalLB IPs, so LAN clients resolve internal services without hairpin NAT.

Configuration lives in `kube/sys/coredns/coredns.yml`.

### AdGuard Home (Ad-blocking DNS)

AdGuard Home runs at `192.168.1.222` and sits between CoreDNS and the upstream resolver. It filters ads and trackers for all DNS queries originating from the LAN. Configuration is managed via the AdGuard web UI at `adguard.matthew-stratton.me`.

### Local Client DNS (Split DNS)

Internal services have no public DNS records -- they only exist in CoreDNS's static hosts file. LAN clients using an external resolver (Cloudflare, VPN-pushed DNS, etc.) won't be able to resolve them.

A NetworkManager dispatcher script ([`scripts/homelab-split-dns.sh`](../scripts/homelab-split-dns.sh)) handles this for Linux workstations with `systemd-resolved`. On every connection event, it probes CoreDNS to detect the home network, then configures a `~matthew-stratton.me` routing domain via `resolvectl` to direct matching queries to CoreDNS. It works across connection types (wifi, ethernet, thunderbolt dock), is inert off the home network, and survives VPN reconnects. Install to `/etc/NetworkManager/dispatcher.d/` and `chmod 755`.

## Router Configuration (MikroTik)

The MikroTik RB5009UPr+S+IN is provisioned via Ansible with system configuration, DHCP, DNS, and service hardening. Two playbooks handle setup:

- **`mikrotik-bootstrap.yml`** (one-time): Migrates from factory defaults (192.168.88.0/24) to 192.168.1.0/24, creates SSH user with key auth
- **`mikrotik-configure.yml`** (idempotent): Configures system identity, DHCP pool (192.168.1.50-199), DNS (1.1.1.1), static DHCP leases for infrastructure, service hardening, and auto-update scheduling

The router ships with a factory-default firewall (NAT masquerade, input/forward chains). External access configuration (Cloudflare proxy firewall rules, DDNS, port forwarding) is in progress.

Node-level firewalls are disabled -- `firewalld` is masked on all nodes via Ansible. k3s manages its own iptables rules.

## MetalLB

[MetalLB](https://metallb.universe.tf/) provides load balancer IPs for Kubernetes services on bare-metal. It runs in L2 (ARP) mode, announcing service IPs on the LAN so the router and other devices can reach them.

Configuration:
- **IP pool**: `192.168.1.220-239` (defined in `kube/sys/metallb/addresspool.yml`)
- **Mode**: L2Advertisement
- **Chart**: Bitnami MetalLB via Helmfile (`kube/sys/metallb/helmfile.yaml`)

Services request a specific IP from the pool using `spec.loadBalancerIP` in their Service definition. The pool must not overlap with the router's DHCP range.

## Ingress Controllers

The cluster runs two separate ingress-nginx controllers to separate internet-facing and LAN-only traffic. Both deploy to the `ingress-nginx` namespace as independent Helm releases.

### External (`nginx-external`)

Handles internet-facing traffic arriving via Cloudflare.

| Setting | Value |
| ------- | ----- |
| IngressClass | `nginx-external` |
| LoadBalancer IP | `192.168.1.220` |
| Proxy protocol | Enabled (required for Cloudflare) |
| ModSecurity + OWASP CRS | Enabled |
| SSL passthrough | Enabled |

Proxy protocol is needed because traffic arrives through Cloudflare's reverse proxy -- without it, all source IPs would appear as Cloudflare's.

### Internal (`nginx-internal`)

Handles LAN-only traffic. Restricted by source IP ranges.

| Setting | Value |
| ------- | ----- |
| IngressClass | `nginx-internal` |
| LoadBalancer IP | `192.168.1.221` |
| Source IP allowlist | `192.168.1.0/24`, `10.42.0.0/24`, `10.43.0.0/16` |
| External traffic policy | `Local` (preserves client IP) |
| SSL passthrough | Enabled |

No ModSecurity or WAF rules -- internal traffic is trusted.

Each app's `network.yml` specifies which ingress class it uses. To see current assignments: `kubectl get ingress -A`.

## TLS

### Kubernetes TLS (cert-manager)

[cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/) automates TLS certificate issuance for Kubernetes ingresses. It uses LetsEncrypt with Cloudflare DNS-01 challenges -- no HTTP-01 challenge is needed since DNS validation works regardless of whether the service is internet-accessible.

Two ClusterIssuers are configured:
- **`letsencrypt`** -- Production issuer, used by default
- **`letsencrypt-staging`** -- For testing (avoids rate limits)

The default issuer is set in cert-manager's Helm values (`defaultIssuerName: letsencrypt`), so ingresses get TLS certificates automatically without explicit annotations. Ingresses that need staging certs override with `cert-manager.io/cluster-issuer: "letsencrypt-staging"`.

Cloudflare API credentials (`CF_EMAIL`, `CF_API_KEY`) are injected via `envsubst` from `.envrc` into the ClusterIssuer manifests during deployment.

Configuration lives in `kube/sys/cert-manager/`.

### Synology DSM TLS (acme.sh)

The Synology NAS has its own LetsEncrypt certificate for the DSM web UI, managed separately from cert-manager using [acme.sh](https://github.com/acmesh-official/acme.sh) with Cloudflare DNS validation.

A scheduled task in DSM Control Panel periodically runs a renewal script:

- **Script**: `/var/services/homes/certadmin/cert-renew.sh` (contains Cloudflare API tokens)
- **Synology user**: `certadmin` -- a dedicated DSM user the script uses to update the certificate in DSM
- **Scheduled task**: Runs as the `root` system user
- **Cloudflare auth**: The script needs a [Cloudflare API token](https://github.com/acmesh-official/acme.sh/wiki/dnsapi#dns_cf) -- if renewal breaks, this is the most likely cause

Troubleshooting:
- Add `--debug 2` to the acme.sh commands in the renewal script for verbose output
- SSH access requires `sudo su` to interact with the scheduled task or script
- Upgrade acme.sh (as root): `/usr/local/share/acme.sh/acme.sh --force --upgrade --nocron --home /usr/local/share/acme.sh`

Reference: [Synology DSM 7 with LetsEncrypt and DNS Challenge](https://dr-b.io/post/Synology-DSM-7-with-Lets-Encrypt-and-DNS-Challenge)

## References

- [ingress-nginx bare-metal considerations](https://kubernetes.github.io/ingress-nginx/deploy/baremetal/)
- [MetalLB L2 mode](https://metallb.universe.tf/concepts/layer2/)
- [cert-manager ACME ingress tutorial](https://cert-manager.io/docs/tutorials/acme/ingress/)
- [acme.sh Cloudflare DNS API](https://github.com/acmesh-official/acme.sh/wiki/dnsapi#dns_cf)

## Related Documentation

- [Getting Started](00-getting-started.md) -- Hardware details, software stack overview
- [RPis and k3s](01-rpis-and-k3s.md) -- k3s configuration, disabled components (Traefik, ServiceLB, CoreDNS)
- [Persistence](02-persistence.md) -- Synology NAS storage configuration
- [Security](04-security.md) -- Authentication with oauth2-proxy
- [Observability](05-observability.md) -- Logging and monitoring
